The University provides on-campus child care services for approximately 160 children ranging in age from two months to five years. Stony Brook Child Care Services is a nonprofit, nationally accredited center, providing service for University students, faculty, and staff. The Center is staffed by professionals in the early childhood field who are assisted by students enrolled in coursework practice.
The primary aim is to provide a warm, supportive, and creative atmosphere in which each child, and each child's family, is regarded as individual. Hours of operation vary. Fees are charged on a sliding scale based on income.
There is a waiting list for the Center; interested persons should complete an application well before the service will be needed, as placement cannot be guaranteed. Call (631) 632-6930 for more information.

Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS) provides crisis intervention, brief psychotherapy, psychiatric care, and group and couples therapy free of charge for Stony Brook students (including SPD students) who are enrolled in a degree-granting program and registered for at least six credit hours. Counseling services are available year-round. All information about counseling at CAPS is strictly confidential, except for that information needed in situations where there is an imminent threat or danger.
Students do not have to be confronting desperate or overwhelming difficulties in order to benefit from counseling. We encourage students to come in and discuss problems, even if they are not sure that counseling is what they need. For many students, dealing effectively with emotional and social issues increases their success with academic work. CAPS is a place that can help with many issues faced by students.
CAPS also has outreach programs to enhance personal growth and develop skills. The most popular workshops deal with stress management, meditation, and study skills. These programs are free for all Stony Brook students. In addition to workshops, CAPS sponsors a weekly radio program that focuses on health and mental health issues, "Taking Care of Yourself."During the school year CAPS is open Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. During intersession, summer, and spring break CAPS is open Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. During these hours, students can call or just walk in to our main location and ask to speak to a counselor. After regular business hours, students can also call CAPS to speak with a licensed mental health counselor.CAPS is located on the second floor of the Student Health Center, near the Stadium on the west campus. HSC students may schedule appointments in the new Health Sciences Center Counseling Center, located on Level 3 (the same level as the HSC Library). Call (631) 632-6720 for appointments and further information.For mental health emergencies after hours and on weekends, students should call the University Police at 911 from on-campus extensions and (631) 632-3333 if calling from off campus or a cell phone, or go to the University Hospital Emergency Room. Anyone not experiencing an emergency but wanting to speak to someone after hours and on weekends can call CAPS (631-632-6720) and will be connected to an after-hours counselor.

Off-Campus Housing is a service provided by Commuter Student Services to assist students in locating and securing off campus living arrangements. Various housing options are available to rent in the Stony Brook University vicinity including houses, studios, apartments, house shares, and rooms to rent.The interactive Web site at stonybrook.edu/offcampusliving allows students to search and view available accommodations based on a number of factors including housing preference type, price, and distance from the Stony Brook campus. The site contains useful information such as short-term housing, landlord/tenant information, transportation, and local services, as well as roommate referral.The Off-Campus Housing Office is located on the second floor of the Student Activities Center, Room 225.
         
Majors in the College of Engineering & Applied Sciences: Successful applicants in these majors will, in addition to our regular admission criteria, typically have earned outstanding grades in high school calculus and physics, and performed exceptionally well on the Math section of the SAT and/or ACT. Consideration is given to students who have performed well in advanced science and math courses, as well as those who have participated in science, math, and research competitions.

Business Management: Successful applicants will, in addition to our regular admission criteria, typically display evidence of achievement in mathematics and writing and will have performed particularly well on both the Math and Critical Reading sections of the SAT and/or ACT.
Music: In addition to the application to the University, a separate Music Major Application is required. Students who perform successfully in the audition and their theory placement and musicianship exams will be admitted to the music major upon admission to the University. In addition, students participating in this audition process may be considered for scholarship offers and the opportunity to study with Performance Faculty.
Pharmacology: Successful applicants will, in addition to our regular admission criteria, typically have earned outstanding grades in high school calculus and physics, and performed exceptionally well on the Math section of the SAT and/or ACT. Consideration is given to students who have performed well in advanced science and math courses, as well as those who have participated in science, math, and research competitions.  
Restricted Majors in the Health Sciences: These health sciences majors are upper-division and require completion of 57 college credits and specific courses/grade prerequisites. Those interested in these upper-division majors may apply for admission as a freshman in the College of Arts and Sciences, where they can enroll in the course prerequisites. An application to the upper-division program will need to be filed through the Health Sciences Office of Student Services the year in which you anticipate completing all prerequisites. 

The Honors College
The Honors College offers a limited number of students the opportunity to become members of a special community of scholars and pursue a challenging four-year curriculum designed to promote intellectual curiosity, independence, and critical thinking. As the most selective academic program for undergraduates at the University, Honors College applicants are expected to demonstrate overall academic excellence in high school, possess outstanding standardized test scores, have a record of advanced or college-level coursework, and display evidence of strong writing ability. Exceptional talent in the fine and performing arts also serves to qualify a student for admission. All students admitted to the Honors College receive scholarship support. Visit http://www.stonybrook.edu/honors for more information.Through this program, students are jointly admitted to one of the participating colleges and to Stony Brook. Participating students must remain in good academic standing prior to commencing their studies at Stony Brook.Further information and details on this program are available from an admissions counselor at Stony Brook or from the admissions office at one of the participating colleges.
 
Stony Brook routinely provides equivalents for several SUNY and CUNY institutions. Many of these course equivalents can be viewed online at http://www.stonybrook.edu/transfer.Students needing additional information should consult an admissions counselor.
 
Each new student is required to pay an advance tuition deposit and an additional deposit when housing is requested. Fall deposits, which are applied against charges incurred by the student in the first semester, are due by May 1.
Tuition deposit refund requests must be made in writing to Student Accounts Office, 254 Administration, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-1301, or faxed to (631) 632-1308 by the appropriate deadlines below.Fall: Refund requests for deposits made for the Fall semester must be received by the date printed on the acceptance letter; For Fall, the due date is May 1 or 30 days after the offer of admissions, whichever is later. However, there are no refunds of the tuition deposit after the first day of classes.Spring: Refund requests for deposits made for the Spring semester must be received within 30 days after the offer of admissions or the first day of Spring classes, whichever is earlier. There are no refunds of the tuition deposit after the first day of classes.

A housing deposit is required to reserve a housing assignment on campus. If a student no longer plans to reside on campus, he/she may request a partial refund of his/her housing deposit in accordance with the appropriate semester deadlines. If a student chooses to request a refund after making a room deposit, a forfeit fee of $100 per each request will be assessed.
 
The University awards scholarships to selected students based on merit and/or need. For further information on any of the merit scholar­ship programs listed below, see the Scholarships Web site at http://www.stonybrook.edu/scholarships or contact the Office of Student Financial Aid Services at (631) 632-6840.

Honors College
Honors College scholarships are awarded to students of proven academic ability who desire intellectual challenge and the opportunity for creative interaction in a highly personalized teaching environment.  All students admitted to the Honors College will receive scholarship support based on the merits of their academic achievement. For detailed information and application forms, contact the director of the Honors College, at (631) 632-4378 or visit their Web site at http://www.stonybrook.edu/honors. Applications can be downloaded from the Web site.

The College of Engineering and Applied Sciences (CEAS) administers a number of scholarships ranging from $500 to full tuition awards for incoming freshmen and continuing students enrolled in one or more of the college's eleven majors (biomedical engineering, chemical and molecular engineering, civil engineering, computer engineering, electrical engineering, engineering science, mechanical engineering, computer science, information systems, applied mathematics and statistics, and technological systems management).
The scholarships are funded by a variety of private and corporate donors; there are different eligibility requirements for the different scholarships although, in general, entering freshmen should have a high school average not less than 90 and continuing students should have a cumulative g.p.a. not less than 3.00.

Scholarship opportunities for continu­ing CEAS students are announced at the end of the fall semester, with an application deadline in late January and selection of recipients in April for scholarship support in the subsequent academic year. For the most recent information, students may contact the CEAS Under­­grad­uate Student Office at (631) 632-8381, or visit the Web site at http://www.ceas.sunysb.eduFollowing is a list of scholarships admin­istered by CEAS. Depending on the funding source, some of the scholar­ships are available every year and others on a less regular basis. The availability of scholarships varies from year to year and is con­tingent upon donor resources and interests, as well as variable economic trends. There are different eligibility require­ments for each of these scholarships:

Applied Mathematics and Statistics Memorial Scholarship; Arkwin Industries, Inc. Scholarship; Carol Cooke/Siemens Corporation Telecommunications Scholarship; Curtiss-Wright Centennial of Flight Scholarship; Data Device Corporation Scholarship; Dayton T. Brown Scholarship; Edo Marine and Aircraft Systems Scholarship; Frances and Velio Marsocci Award; Grumman Endowment Scholarship; GT Equipment Technologies Scholarship; Industrial Partnership Program Scholarships; Joan M. Kenny Memorial Scholarship; Metropolitan Club/Association of Old Crows Scholarship; Omnicon Group Inc. Scholarship; Omnicon/WISE Scholarship; Rahsaan T. Jackson Scholarship Award for Extraordinary Achievement; Robert J. and Katherine B. Frey Scholarship; Society of Flight Test Engineers Scholarship; Society of Automotive Engineers Scholarship; Military Engineers Scholarship/Ehasz Giacalone Architects, P.C.; Stewart Harris Scholarship; Srivastav, Tucker and Weitzman Scholarship; Svam International Inc. Scholarship; St. Paul Traveler's Insurance Co., Scholarship; Tau Beta Pi Scholarship; Thomas Irvine Scholarship in Mechanical Engineering; Weinig Foundation Scholarship

The Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program is sponsored by the National Science Foundation. The program provides both academic support and stipends to minority students planning to major in science, math, engineering, or technology and who maintain a cumulative g.p.a. of 3.00. For this program, a minority student is defined as being of African American, Latino/Hispanic, Native American, Alaskan Native, Hawaiian Native, or American Pacific Islander heritage. Interested students should contact Paul Siegel at (631) 632-8716 or at Paul.Siegel@stonybrook.edu.

The Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program (CSEMS), funded by the National Science Foundation, is a four-year program that provides comprehensive academic and scholarship support for bachelor's degree students in applied mathematics, biomedical engineering, computer science, information systems, electrical and computer engineering, mechanical engineering, materials science, and mathematics. Continued scholarship support is predicated upon maintaining a cumulative g.p.a. of 3.00. Students must be low-income as determined by a FAFSA form filed with the Office of Student Financial Aid Services. Women, minorities, students with disabilities, and transfer students are strongly encouraged to apply. Students interested in this program should contact Paul Siegel at (631) 632-8716 or at Paul.Siegel@stonybrook.edu.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Undergraduate Research Fellow Scholarships
This program provides fellowship support to selected students engaged in  research in the biological sciences at Stony Brook. Women and students from underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged to apply. Scholarships are available for both the academic year and the summer. Students interested in this scholarship should contact Judy Nimmo in the Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology at (631) 632-9750.

Music Scholarships
The Department of Music offers a limited number of competitive scholarships to incoming freshmen and transfer students. Students may compete for scholarships in performance, composition, history, or theory. Applications are due in late January, and scholarship auditions take place in early February.For more information, call the Director of Undergraduate Studies, Department of Music, at (631) 632-7330.

State, National, and International Scholarships and Fellowships
The University nominates candidates for awards including: the Beinecke Scholarship; the Churchill Scholarship; the Jack Kent Cooke Scholarship; Fulbright Grants for Graduate Study Abroad; the Gates Cambridge Scholarship; the Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship; the James Madison Memorial Fellowship; the Marshall Scholarship; the George J. Mitchell Scholarship; the Rhodes Scholarship; the Rotary Foundation Scholarship; the Benjamin and David Scharps Prize; the Paul and Daisy Soros Fellowship for New Americans; the Harry S. Truman Scholarship; the UNCF-MERCK Science Research Scholarship; the Morris K. Udall Foundation Scholarship; and the Woodrow Wilson National Foundation Fellowships.
The Office of Undergraduate Academic Affairs oversees the application process for the majority of prestigious scholarships and fellowships listed above. Most awards require a campus endorsement before the applications can be forwarded to the final levels of competition. To help students prepare competitive applications, the office offers workshops and individual advising on selecting recommenders, preparing compelling personal statements, interviewing, and developing project proposals or proposed programs of study. Advance preparation for these awards is essential.
Before beginning the application process, students who are interested in applying for these prestigious scholarships/awards are encouraged to contact the campus representative in Undergraduate Academic Affairs at (631) 632-7080, Melville Library N-3071, to discuss scholarship options and future preparation requirements. Stop by and pick up a copy of the previous year's application to use as a working guide until the current year's application becomes available. See also http://www.stonybrook.edu/uaa/scholarshipfellowships/index.shtml

Athletic Grants-in-Aid
Stony Brook's athletic program offers aid based on merit in all 20 varsity sports. For more information, students may call the Athletic Office at (631) 632-7205.
Other ScholarshipsThe scholarships listed here are merely examples of the several available at Stony Brook. Undergraduate students interested in other scholarships should contact their academic department and the scholarship Web site for the fullest and most up-to-date information about Stony Brook University scholarships, as well as suggestions for non-University scholarship support.Dr. Connie and Dr. Lee Koppelman ScholarshipsThis program provides four $1,000 one-year scholarships for high-achieving upper-division students (juniors and seniors) who are majoring in either Women's Studies and/or Political Science and have demonstrated financial need.Linda and Richard Gelfond ScholarshipThis program provides a one-year scholarship to an incoming freshman, a sophomore, a junior, and a senior with an outstanding academic record and excellent demonstrated leadership skills.Shiming Hu Memorial AwardsThe Shiming Hu Memorial Leadership Award is given to a graduating senior who has played a significant role in an Asian interest club or organization on campus.The Shiming Hu Chinese Studies Scholarship is given to an upper-division student who has displayed excellence in the study of Chinese language or culture.
 
 

