Requirements for Admission
Admission to the Graduate School and School of Professional Development requires that the applicant have the preparation and ability that — in the judgment of the program and the Graduate School/School of Professional Development — are sufficient to enable satisfactory progress in the degree program or certificate. A U.S. bachelor’s degree or the equivalent is required (for example, a four-year/120 credit hour accredited program) with a minimum overall grade point average of 3.0 on a 4.0 scale. The student must present evidence that such a degree will be awarded by the time graduate work is to begin.Students who already hold an advanced academic degree from any university may not earn a second degree from Stony Brook University at the same level in the same disciplinary field (e.g., if you have an MS in Computer Science, you cannot also earn a Stony Brook MS in Computer Science).
Application for admission to the Graduate School/School of Professional Development is made to a specific program for a designated degree or certificate. Additional admission requirements are listed in each program’s section of this publication. To be considered for admission, all applicants must submit a completed application online as well as the following documentation to the graduate program.One official copy of any transcript from any undergraduate college or university attended, from which a degree was conferred. Applicants must submit one official copy of any transcript relating to any graduate level work undertaken, regardless of whether or not a degree was earned. (If transcripts are in a foreign language, authoritative English translations are required in addition to the original documents. See Academic FAQs under Transcripts for a list of acceptable translation services.).For Post-Master's Advanced Graduate Certificates an official transcript from a graduate college or university from which a master's degree was conferred will be accepted.
Note: Educational systems that cannot be compared to the United States must be evaluated by a US credentials evaluation service before admission can be finalized..Three letters of recommendation.Scores for the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) General Test sent directly from ETS (photocopies are not acceptable)Documented proficiency in English for international students (see the English Proficiency Requirements for Non-Native Speakers of English below for details).
To fill out an application, students must go to www.grad.sunysb.edu or http://www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/spd/admissions/program_list.html and create an online account. A nonrefundable application must be charged via credit card when submitting the online application. All applicants are required to pay the application fee. Exceptions can be found under Waiver of Application Fee.Early application is suggested for students seeking financial support. To receive full consideration for admission with financial support, complete admission and financial aid applications should be filed by January 15 for the fall semester and October 1 for the spring semester. Admission decisions are made by programs. Late applications will be accepted but will be considered only by the programs where openings still exist.An offer of admission to graduate study at Stony Brook is for a specific semester. An applicant who is accepted to a program and is unable to enroll for the semester specified should request a deferment of admission from the primary department or program. If the request is granted, the student will be sent a new offer of admission for the subsequent semester, and the Graduate School/School of Professional Development will be notified accordingly.Students who do not enroll within 12 months of the original offer of admission must submit a new application and fee.International students must submit a new “Request for Certificate of Eligibility and Declaration and Certification of Finances” form to request an updated Form I-20 or IAP-66 valid for the updated semester of admission. Unused Forms I-20 or IAP-66 must first be returned. For more information, please see the Visa and International Services site.
 
An applicant must have a minimum undergraduate cumulative grade point average of 3.00 on a 4.00 point scale, where A=4.00, A-=3.67, B+=3.33, B=3.00, B-=2.67, C+=2.33, C=2.00, C-=1.67 and D+=1.33, D=1.00, D-=. 67 and F=0.00. If the student attends a college that only gives Passes or Credits for the first year of study then these grades will be evaluated as C for GPA admission purposes unless the student provides actual grades.Non-matriculated students applying through the School of Professional Development must have a minimum undergraduate cumulative grade point average of 2.50 on a 4.00 point scale.Please refer to the admission requirements of the specific program of interest. Applicants who have taken the GRE should request that Educational Testing Service forward scores directly to the Graduate School (the Stony Brook code is 2548). Failure to submit GRE scores with the completed application will prevent the review of student applications by the program. Photocopies are not acceptable. To register for the GRE, please see  www.ets.org .Several graduate programs do not require the GRE, but some of these require a different examination. Please refer to information about your program. You can also view a list of these programs in Admissions FAQs under Test Scores. The GRE Examination is waived for students in approved Stony Brook accelerated, five-year bachelor's/master's programs.
 
English Language Requirements.All students who are not native or primary speakers of English must demonstrate proficiency in English to be admitted to the Graduate School. Stony Brook University has established overall minimum English language competency requirements for admission to graduate study and additional, more stringent speak competency requirements for PhD applicants as well as master’s students who serve as Teaching Assistants. Students may be conditionally admitted without meeting some admission requirements, but under no circumstances may students teach in a class or laboratory until they have met Stony Brook University’s speak competency requirements.A native speaker of English is someone who learned English as a child and uses English as his or her primary language at home. A primary speaker of English may speak a language other than English at home but has developed native fluency as a result of using English exclusively in most social and educational contexts.All students must declare their native language as part of the admission process. Intentional misrepresentation by a student of his or her native language is academic dishonesty and is grounds for dismissal from the graduate school.English Proficiency Requirements for Admission.To be considered for admission, an applicant who is not a native or primary speaker of English must present a minimum score for either the TOEFL or IELTS tests, as defined below. Students who fail to meet this requirement must enroll in a course at the Intensive English Center (IEC) and achieve satisfactory grades before admission to graduate study. At the request of the program, conditional admission may be offered to students who do not meet minimal language requirements for admission. Note: Students whose scores on either of these tests are more than two years old must retake the test.IELTS: Overall score of 6.5, with no subsection recommended to be below 6TOEFL iBT: Overall score of 90 for doctoral applicants and 85 for master’s applicants
 
Note: Master's students who have earned a degree from an English language university or college, where all instruction is in English, may be admitted without taking the TOEFL or IELTS tests, but such students must still meet Stony Brook University’s English language competency requirements in order to be a Teaching Assistant.
All accepted students are required by New York State law to file a completed health history and physical examination with the Student Health Service. Transfer students may submit copies of their health forms from their former schools provided they contain the information required by the Student Health Service and are less than two years old.
Each person planning to study, teach or engage in research in the United States is required to have the appropriate immigration status for that activity. The immigration documents for F-1 and J-1 student status are issued by Visa and Immigration Services at Stony Brook University based on receipt of required supporting documentation, including evidence of admission, English language proficiency, and proof of financial support for the program of study. Non-immigrant students are responsible for obtaining and maintaining the appropriate immigration status for their stays in the United States.
Upon application to Stony Brook University, Visa and Immigration Services will email applicants information on how to log in to accessVIS and submit the electronic request for a Form I-20/DS-2019.  Requests are processed upon BOTH admission to the academic department and  clearance  by the Graduate School.
Government regulations require that international students attend the institution that issued the I-20/DS-2019 used for entry into the United States. Transfers between institutions may be possible if a student can show that he or she reported to the original institution with the appropriate clearance. 
Please contact Visa and Immigration Services for any questions related to I-20/DS-2019 issuance or transfers.The majority of credits taken during any semester must apply toward a student’s primary degree program. Failure to comply with the guidelines below will result in the tuition scholarship being rescinded for the semester, and the student will be responsible to pay the tuition for that semester.A maximum of 12 credits may be transferred to a master’s program and a maximum of 6 credits may be transferred to a certificate program at Stony Brook with the approval of the program and the Graduate School provided that they have not been used toward the satisfaction of any degree or certificate requirements here or at another institution. A candidate for the doctoral degree may transfer those graduate credits that are allowed by the appropriate departmental or program committee.
Transfer from Non-Matriculated Status
Students transferring from non-matriculated status are limited to a maximum of 12 graduate credits for master’s degrees and 6 credits for certificates. Students must be formally matriculated into a degree program before the petition to transfer is submitted. All graduate courses completed in non-matriculated status will be counted as part of the total graduate grade point average (GPA).
Transfer from Other InstitutionsA candidate for the master’s degree may petition to transfer a maximum of 12 graduate credits from another institution toward their master’s degree requirements. These credits must be from an institution authorized to grant graduate degrees by recognized accredited commissions and meet the following guidelines:Credits must not have been used to fulfill the requirements for either a baccalaureate or another advanced degree or certificate.Credits must not be more than five years old at the time the student is admitted to graduate study at Stony Brook. Acceptance of courses older than five years are contingent upon support of the program director and approval by the Graduate School or School of Professional Development.Credits must clearly be graduate level in order to be considered for transfer.Credits must carry the grades of A or B. “Pass” or “Satisfactory” grades are not transferable unless these grades can be substantiated by the former institution as B (3.0) or better.Grades earned in transferred courses are not counted as part of the overall GPA at Stony Brook.Work from one master’s degree is not transferable to a second one.
Transfer from Non-US institutions
Courses taken at institutions outside the United States: College-level courses completed outside the United States and recorded on official transcripts will be evaluated for transfer credit, provided that the institution where the courses were taken is accredited by the Ministry of Education in that country. International transfer students who have completed college level courses outside the United States may be requested to submit proof of accreditation by the Ministry of Education or provide a WES evaluation.
Transfer Between Primary and Secondary Programs
A maximum of 12 graduate credits from Stony Brook, which were earned in a primary program prior to a student being accepted into a secondary program, can be applied to the secondary program. Credits applied to the degree requirements of a primary program cannot be applied toward the degree requirements of a secondary program.
NOTE: In rare instances, the transferring of credits may vary by program. Please refer to the program listing. 
 
Stackable Credentials (For School of Professional Development Programs Only)
Graduate level credits earned and applied to a micro-credential (a university badge and/or an advanced graduate certificate program) can be also be applied toward a master’s degree in the School of Professional Development. These credits may also be applied to another university badge, but they cannot be applied to another advanced graduate certificate program. Once a student has completed a master's degree, that student is no longer eligible to earn an Advanced Graduate Certificate that would lead to that same master's degree. The courses being applied cannot be more than 5 years old, and transfer credits from another institution cannot be applied in addition to the micro-credential credits. 
Should a student wish to change their graduate programs or academic levels following admission and matriculation, a Change of Graduate Program and/or Academic Level form must be submitted to the Graduate School with original signatures by both prior and new Graduate Program Directors and advisors. The form can be downloaded at www.grad.sunysb.edu. In addition, international students who seek to change their program must obtain approval of an international student advisor.
Students must submit this form to the Graduate School before the first day of classes of the first semester indicated for the New Degree Program/Level. Forms received after this date will be denied.
When an accelerated student has completed a minimum of 105 undergraduate credits, has taken the maximum allotted number of graduate credits as an undergraduate student, and has less than a full-time (12 credits) undergraduate course load needed to complete their Bachelor’s degree requirements, they should matriculate into their Graduate career. Matriculation requires submission of the “Application to Graduate School for the Accelerated Bachelors/Master’s Degree” form and an admission letter signed by the Graduate Program Director to the Graduate School. Students should consult with both their Undergraduate Program Director and their Graduate Program Director for advising and guidance on matriculation.
As part of the Accelerated Program, students can continue working on their Bachelor’s degree requirements as a Masters student. The Bachelor’s degree will be awarded once all requirements are met. Degrees with distinction are awarded at the undergraduate level only. Undergraduate coursework taken during the graduate career will calculate into the undergraduate GPA to determine distinction for Accelerated Degree Program students.
As per Graduate School policy, undergraduate courses DO NOT count towards graduate degree requirements. Also, per university policy, a student must spend at least one year in residency for the master’s portion of the program. Additionally, state regulation requires that students must earn a minimum of 30 graduate credits for the master’s portion of the program.
Accelerated Bachelor’s/Master’s ProgramsFive-year bachelor’s/master’s programs are available in several academic departments. Some are joint programs between two departments or colleges. Students are allowed to take a specified number of graduate credits that will count towards both their undergraduate and graduate requirements; subsequently reducing the total time for completion of the master’s degree.
        
Students admitted for full-time study to the Graduate School will usually register for either 12 or nine credit hours per semester based on their academic level. Responsibility for certifying the full-time status of graduate students rests with the Office of the Registrar. Incoming full-time graduate students are classified as G1, G2, G3, or G4 depending on the program to which they have been admitted and their previous graduate training.* G1-First year master's or advanced graduate certificate student who has completed less than twenty-four graduate credits. G1 students must register for 12 credits per semester.G2-Advanced master's or advanced graduate certificate student who has completed twenty-four or more graduate credits. G2 students must register for 9 credits per semester.G3-First year PhD graduate student who has completed less than twenty-four graduate credits. G3 students must register for 12 credits per semester.G4-Advanced PhD graduate student who has completed twenty-four or more graduate credits. G4 students must register for 9 credits per semester.G5-Advanced graduate student enrolled in a doctoral degree program that has been advanced to candidacy for the doctoral degree by Day 10 of a semester or term. G5 students must register for 9 credits unless instructed otherwise.To be considered full time, all students in any summer term must register for zero (0) or more credits. Students who do not register in a summer class with zero (0) or more credits cannot have full time status.A G1 will be automatically converted to a G2 when the student has completed and received grades for 24 or more graduate credits at Stony Brook; a G3 will be automatically converted to a G4 when the student has completed and received grades for 24 or more graduate credits at Stony Brook; Incompletes are not completed credits. The conversion of G4 to G5 is an administrative change that is done by the program and the Graduate School upon advancement to candidacy.The maximum number of credits a Graduate Student may register for is 18. If students wish to enroll for more than 18 graduate credits, they must get the permission of their Graduate Program Director and the Graduate School. Once they have received written permission they will be allowed to register for more than 18 graduate credits at the Registrar’s Office.  
        
Part-Time Students-Incoming part-time students admitted to the Graduate School will register for no more than 11 credit hours per semester. Programs may, in consultation with the dean of the Graduate School, regulate the proportion of part-time students in their graduate program.Part-time students are classified as G1, G2, G3, or G4 depending on the program to which they have been admitted and their previous graduate training.The academic level of a G1 or G3 student who has completed 24 credits of coursework at Stony Brook is changed to G2 or G4, respectively.Part-Time Enrollment Graduate students may be eligible to register part-time in their last semester if the number of credits needed to complete the program is less than a full-time load. If part-time enrollment is authorized for this reason, the student MUST graduate at the end of that particular term.International students should contact the Visa and Immigration Services office.Domestic students who hold a Graduate/Teaching Assistantship on campus should have their Graduate Program Coordinator contact the Graduate School with a request for part-time enrollment.         

